DDS tuning troubleshooting (#700)
ros2/ros2_documentation: source/Troubleshooting/DDS-tuning.rst

DDS tuning information
======================

This page provides some guidance on DDS parameter tunings that have been found to address issues with delayed and dropped messages, or issues where the middleware can flood the network.

The recommendations below are starting points for tuning; they worked for specific systems and environments, but the tuning may vary depending on a number of factors.
You may need to increase or decrease values while debugging relative to factors like message size, network topology, etc.

It is important to recognize that tuning parameters can come at a cost to resources, and may affect parts of your system beyond the scope of the desired improvements.
The benefits of improving reliability should be weighed against any detriments for each individual case.

Fast RTPS tuning
----------------

**Issue:** Fast RTPS floods the network with large pieces of data or fast-published data when operating over Wifi.

> When a UDP packet is missing at least one IP fragment, the rest of the received fragments fill up the kernel buffer.

Reviewer: This isn't specific to Fast RTPS but applies to all DDS implementations (if they don't use a custom transport).

Reviewer 2: I mean, to be perfectly honest, it doesn't even apply just to DDS at all; it is a Linux kernel networking thing.  But I'm not sure that is relevant here; the problems we saw were with Fast-RTPS over Wifi.  This is the solution we came up with for that combination.  I don't have enough information to confirm or deny if a) the problem occurs at all with other DDS vendors, and b) whether changing this helps.  So I think this is fine to leave for Fast-RTPS for now.

Reviewer: As you pointed out yourself this is not specific to one vendor - not even DDS. Therefore I don't think it should appear in a "FastRPTS-only" section.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand what you are suggesting, basically.  This is a page of solutions for specific problems that we have encountered, and potential workarounds for them.  How would you restructure this?

Reviewer: This part could be moved into a section about the vendor specific sections since it applies to all.

Author: Do the solutions to this issue also apply to all or is it just that the issue can happen under any implementation?

If it's the former, then I will make the whole section a non-vendor-specific section. If the latter is the case, I think it would be ok just to point out in the "Issue" explanation that, yes, this can happen under any DDS implementation, but the following solutions are for Fast RTPS (keeping the section labeled "Fast RTPS")

Reviewer: The current issue description isn't very helpful imo:

> Fast RTPS floods the network with large pieces of data or fast-published data when operating over Wifi.

The actually problematic use case is sending data with e.g. best effort over lossy (usually wifi) connections and when some of the IP fragments get dropped the kernel buffer on the receiving side might become full. By default it has a size of 256kb and a timeout (to drop incomplete UDP packets) of 30s. So the data size needs to be either frequent enough and/or big enough with enough dropped fragments to fill that buffer.

The problem case is generic across all vendors.

> This causes it to hang for 30 seconds in cases where it recovers, or multiples of 30 seconds in cases where it immediately re-clogs.

Reviewer 2: I just realized that this doesn't really completely describe the situation.  It is more like:

```
By default, the Linux kernel will hold onto packet fragments for up to 30 seconds in an effort to recombine them.  Since the kernel buffer is full at this point, no new fragments can come in, and so the connection will seemingly "hang" for long periods of time.
```

**Solution:** Use best-effort QoS settings instead of reliable.

> This solution should improve the issue somewhat without having to adjust parameters.

Reviewer: It would be good to clarify what this "solution" does. By using reliable the amount of sent data is reduced since it resends an incomplete sample and therefore floods the network less than best-effort. If the kernel buffer for IP fragments gets full the symptom is the same though (blocking for 30s).

**Solution:** Reduce the value of the ``ipfrag_time`` parameter.

``net.ipv4.ipfrag_time / /proc/sys/net/ipv4/ipfrag_time`` (default 30s) :
Time in seconds to keep an IP fragment in memory.

Reducing this parameter’s value also reduces the window of time where no fragments are received.
The parameter is global for all incoming fragments, so the feasibility of reducing its value needs to be considered for every environment.

> *Adjustments to solve for a ?MB message:*

Author: @clalancette Would it be helpful to include the message size here so your successful trial inputs can be referenced against something?

Reviewer 2: In this particular case, I don't actually have the numbers anymore.  Sorry about that.  I think we can leave that out for now; at least we are pointing people towards the right knobs to tweak.

.. code-block:: console

    sudo sysctl net.ipv4.ipfrag_time=3

**Solution:** Increase the value of the ``ipfrag_high_thresh`` parameter.

``net.ipv4.ipfrag_high_thresh / /proc/sys/net/ipv4/ipfrag_high_thresh`` (default: 262144 bytes):
Maximum memory used to reassemble IP fragments.

Significantly increasing this parameter’s value is an attempt to ensure that the buffer never becomes completely full.
However, the value would likely have to be significantly high to hold all data received during the time window of ``ipfrag_time``, assuming every UDP packet lacks one fragment.

*Adjustments to solve for a ?MB message:*

.. code-block:: console

    sudo sysctl net.ipv4.ipfrag_high_thresh=134217728     # (128 MB)

Cyclone DDS tuning
------------------

**Issue:** Cyclone DDS is not delivering large messages reliably, despite using reliable settings and transferring over a wired network.

This issue should be `addressed soon <https://github.com/eclipse-cyclonedds/cyclonedds/issues/484>`_.
Until then, we’ve come up with the following solution (debugged using `this test program <https://github.com/jacobperron/pc_pipe>`_):

> **Solution:** Increase the maximum OS receive buffer size and the minimum socket receive buffer size that Cyclone uses.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Solution:** Increase the maximum Linux kernel receive buffer size and the minimum socket receive buffer size that Cyclone uses.
```

*Adjustments to solve for a 9MB message:*

> Set the maximum OS receive buffer size, ``rmem_max``, by running:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Set the maximum receive buffer size, ``rmem_max``, by running:
```

 .. code-block:: console

    sudo sysctl -w net.core.rmem_max=2147483647

Or permanently set it by editing the ``/etc/sysctl.d/10-cyclone-max.conf`` file to contain:

 .. code-block:: console

    net.core.rmem_max=2147483647

> Next, to set the minimum socket receive buffer size, write out a configuration file for Cyclone to use while starting, like so:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, to set the minimum socket receive buffer size that Cyclone requests, write out a configuration file for Cyclone to use while starting, like so:
```

.. code-block:: xml

  <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
  <CycloneDDS xmlns="https://cdds.io/config" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:schemaLocation="https://cdds.io/config
  https://raw.githubusercontent.com/eclipse-cyclonedds/cyclonedds/master/etc/cyclonedds.xsd">
      <Domain id="any">
          <Internal>
              <MinimumSocketReceiveBufferSize>10MB</MinimumSocketReceiveBufferSize>
          </Internal>
      </Domain>
  </CycloneDDS>

Then, whenever you are going to run a node, set the following environment variable:

.. code-block:: console

    CYCLONEDDS_URI=file:///absolute/path/to/config_file.xml

RTI Connext tuning
------------------

**Issue:** Connext is not delivering large messages reliably, despite using reliable settings and transferring over a wired network.

**Solution:** This `Connext QoS profile <https://github.com/jacobperron/pc_pipe/blob/master/etc/ROS2TEST_QOS_PROFILES.xml>`_, along with increasing the ``rmem_max`` parameter.

> By tuning the ``net.core.rmem_max`` to 4MB in the Linux kernel, the QoS profile can produce truly reliable behavior.

Reviewer 2: While it may be a bit redundant with what is below, I'd feel better about this if we put in the language on how to tune this.  Something like:

```
Set the maximum receive buffer size, ``rmem_max``, by running:

 .. code-block:: console

    sudo sysctl -w net.core.rmem_max=4194304
```

Also, we should reiterate that this worked fine for reliably delivering a 9MB message, but your mileage may vary depending on the size of data you want to deliver.

> Raw DDS tuning information

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
DDS tuning information
```

==========================

> Depending on the DDS implementation in use, certain variables (e.g. message size, transfer method, publishing frequency) in realistic, nontrivial systems have been shown to flood the network.

Reviewer 2: It's not only flood the network; it's also that they may just take a long time to get delivered.  In all honesty, I think I'd just drop this sentence completely and just lead with the next sentence instead.

> This page provides guidance on DDS parameter tunings that have been found to address issues with delayed and dropped messages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This page provides some guidance on DDS parameter tunings that have been found to address issues with delayed and dropped messages, or issues where the middleware can flood the network.
```

> The solutions here are simply placeholders until the issues are solved at code-level.

Reviewer 2: I think I'd also drop this sentence.  While it is true that some of the issues will be fixed in code, some of them (like the Connext tunings) probably won't be.  If it turns out that things are fixed in code later on, we can just remove those sections from this document.

> They are also not exact-mapped solutions; the values are suggested starting points that worked for  specific test systems.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The recommendations below are starting points for tuning; they worked for specific systems and environments, but the tuning may vary depending on a number of factors.
```

> You will likely need to increase or decrease values while debugging relative to factors like message size, network topology, etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You may need to increase or decrease values while debugging relative to factors like message size, network topology, etc.
```

When a UDP packet is missing at least one IP fragment, the rest of the received fragments fill up the kernel buffer.
This causes it to hang for 30 seconds in cases where it recovers, or multiples of 30 seconds in cases where it immediately re-clogs.

**Solution:** Use best-effort QoS settings instead of reliable.

This solution should improve the issue somewhat without having to adjust parameters.

**Solution:** Reduce the value of the ``ipfrag_time`` parameter.

``net.ipv4.ipfrag_time / /proc/sys/net/ipv4/ipfrag_time`` (default 30s) :
Time in seconds to keep an IP fragment in memory.

Reducing this parameter’s value also reduces the window of time where no fragments are received.
The parameter is global for all incoming fragments, so the feasibility of reducing its value needs to be considered for every environment.

*Adjustments to solve for a ?MB message:*

.. code-block:: console

    sudo sysctl net.ipv4.ipfrag_time=3

**Solution:** Increase the value of the ``ipfrag_high_thresh`` parameter.

``net.ipv4.ipfrag_high_thresh / /proc/sys/net/ipv4/ipfrag_high_thresh`` (default: 262144 bytes):

> Maximum memory used to reassemble IP fragments.

Author: Originally followed by 

> When ipfrag_high_thresh bytes of memory is allocated for this purpose, the fragment handler will toss packets until ipfrag_low_thresh is reached. This also serves as a maximum limit to namespaces different from the initial one.

Is this relevant to the solution / will knowing this affect how the person applies their solution? @clalancette

Reviewer 2: I think we can drop that sentence; the below is a good enough explanation.

.. code-block:: xml

  <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
  <CycloneDDS xmlns="https://cdds.io/config" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:schemaLocation="https://cdds.io/config
  https://raw.githubusercontent.com/eclipse-cyclonedds/cyclonedds/master/etc/cyclonedds.xsd">
      <Domain id="any">
          <Internal>
              <MinimumSocketReceiveBufferSize>10MB</MinimumSocketReceiveBufferSize>
          </Internal>
      </Domain>
  </CycloneDDS>

Then, whenever you are going to run a node, set the following environment variable:

.. code-block:: console

    CYCLONEDDS_URI=file:///absolute/path/to/config_file.xml

RTI Connext tuning
------------------

**Issue:** Connext is not delivering large messages reliably, despite using reliable settings and transferring over a wired network.

**Solution:** This `Connext QoS profile <https://github.com/jacobperron/pc_pipe/blob/master/etc/ROS2TEST_QOS_PROFILES.xml>`_, along with increasing the ``rmem_max`` parameter.

By tuning the ``net.core.rmem_max`` to 4MB in the Linux kernel, the QoS profile can produce truly reliable behavior.

> This configuration has been proven to reliably deliver messages via SHMEM|UDPv4, and with just UDPv4 on a single machine.

Author: @clalancette What’s the “load and no-load situation” that was mentioned here? Is that important

Reviewer 2: "Load" means I had put a lot of stress on the CPUs; that is, I was running a CPU-intensive program using up a lot of my compute power.  This tends to exacerbate issues and make them easier to reproduce.  In this case, I don't think we need that detail.

A multi-machine configuration was also tested with ``rmem_max`` at 4MB and at 20MB (two machines connected with 1Gbps ethernet), with no dropped messages and average message delivery times of 700ms and 371ms, respectively.

Without configuring the kernel’s ``rmem_max``, the same Connext QoS profile took up to 12 seconds for the data to be delivered.
However, it always at least managed to complete the delivery.

> 

Reviewer 2: Essentially, everything that is below is a separate solution, one in which you do not need to adjust `rmem_max`.  I'll suggest we call it out as a separate `**Solution**` section, and mention that this is an alternative to the above.

> Using RTI’s documentation on `configuring flow controllers <https://community.rti.com/forum-topic/transfering-large-data-over-dds>`_, we set up slow, medium and fast flow controllers (seen in the Connext QoS profile link) and tested them without changes to ``rmem_max``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ROS2TEST_QOS_PROFILES.xml file was configured using RTI’s documentation on `configuring flow controllers <https://community.rti.com/forum-topic/transfering-large-data-over-dds>`_.  That profile has slow, medium and fast flow controllers (seen in the Connext QoS profile link).
```

(I still don't love this sentence, but I was trying to get rid of the "we" in there).

.. include results here? Not sure if that’s too specific

The medium flow controller produced the best results for our case.
However, the controllers will still need to be tuned for the particular machine/network/environment they are operating in.

> What we can conclude for certain is that Connext flow controllers can be used to tune bandwidth and its aggressiveness for sending out data, though once the bandwidth of a particular setup is passed, performance will start to drop.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Connext flow controllers can be used to tune bandwidth and its aggressiveness for sending out data, though once the bandwidth of a particular setup is passed, performance will start to drop.
```

(again, don't love it, just trying to get rid of "we")

It is important to recognize that tuning parameters can come at a cost to resources, and may affect parts of your system beyond the scope of the desired improvements.
The benefits of improving reliability should be weighed against any detriments for each individual case.

.. _cross-vendor-tuning:

Cross-vendor tuning
-------------------

**Issue:** Sending data over lossy (usually WiFi) connections becomes problematic when some IP fragments are dropped, possibly causing the kernel buffer on the receiving side to become full.

When a UDP packet is missing at least one IP fragment, the rest of the received fragments fill up the kernel buffer.
By default, the Linux kernel will time out after 30s of trying to recombine packet fragments.
Since the kernel buffer is full at this point (default size is 256KB), no new fragments can come in, and so the connection will seemingly "hang" for long periods of time.

This issue is generic across all DDS vendors, so the solutions involve adjusting kernel parameters.

**Solution:** Use best-effort QoS settings instead of reliable.

> Reliable settings reduce the amount of sent data since it resends an incomplete sample and therefore floods the network less than best-effort.

Reviewer 2: This sentence is a bit backwards.  It should be more like:

```
Best-effort settings reduce the amount of sent data since it will not resend incomplete samples and therefore will flood the network less than reliable.
```
